Hi friends
In this video we are going to learn how to
search an element in an array.
First we have an array of size five
We have an array of five elements. Here
We are checking if five is present in the array
or not
So search key is five
So what we are going to do is We will compare
all the values in the array with the search key
If the key and element in the array are the
same then search is found else search is not found. So let us
start from Index zero. First
We compare one with five but it is not the
same
So we move to the next element
Now we compare 20 with five again
It is not the same
So we move to the right take the element and
compare with key five
It is the same
So the search element five is found in the array
So this is how it is done
Now let us see what happens if the key is
not present in the array
So again we have an array of size five and
here the search key is 100
Now we will start comparing the key and the elements in
the array
So let us start from index zero
So one will be taken and compared with 100 it
is not the same
So we move to the next element
Take 20 and compare with 100 again
It is not the same
So we move to the right take five and compare
with 100 again
It's not the same value so we move to the right
and take 78 and compare with 100 again not the same
So we move to the right compare 30 with 100
Still we are unlucky its not the same value
And there are no more elements in the array now
array is completely visited and 100 was not found
Now let us see the code for implementing this program
So we have the function search to do this job
and we are passing the array, the size of the array and
the key to be searched into the function
Here we have an array of size five so the
variable size will be holding value five and we are
searching for element five so the variable key will also
be holding value
Five
The four loop is used to traverse the array and
each element will be compared with key
And if a match is found break the loop
Otherwise continue for all the elements in the array So let
us see how this works
first We have i equal to zero and zero is less
than five
So condition is true so
Compare one and five and the comparison returns a false
Now i is incremented and becomes one
Now one is less than five
So condition is true
So compare 20 and and five the comparison returns a
false now i is incremented and becomes two now two is
less than five
So condition is true so compare five and five
Now the comparison returns a true And it will come
out of the for loop and returns one and the
search is found
Now let us see the second case
If the key is not present in the the array
the array is same with size 5
But the search key is 100 here so first we
have i equal to zero and zero is less than five
So condition is true
So compare 1 and 100 the comparison returns
A false now i is incremented and it becomes one Now
one is less than five
So condition is true so
Compare 20 and 100 The comparison returns a false and
I becomes two now two is less than five
So condition is true again So compare five and 100
again
The comparison is returning
A false now i is incremented and it becomes three now
three is than five
So condition is true
So compare 78 and 100 And the comparison returns a false now
i is incremented and it becomes four now four is less
than five
So condition is true
So compare 30 and 100
The comparison returns a false and I is incremented and
it becomes five
Now I equal to five And when we check if
i is less than five the condition is false so it
will come out of the loop and returns minus one
and the search is not found
So this is how it works Now let us talk
about the time complexity The best case will be
when the key is present in the first position of
the array. Then the for loop will only work for one
time and break after this one iteration So the best
case time complexity will be order of one and
the worst case will be when the key is present
in the last position of the array
That is if you have an array of five elements
and the key is present in the fifth position then
the for loop will have five iterations
So the time complexity will be order of five
And generally if you have n elements you need n iterations
and the worst case time complexity will be order of
N